Your customers aren't finding you the
way they used to. They're not just
typing into Google anymore. They're
pointing their phone at what they
[music] see. They're asking chatbots
what to buy. They're comparing you
against competitors before you even know
they exist. And if you're still building
traditional funnels, landing pages,
email sequences, retargeting ads, you're
optimizing for a customer journey that
doesn't exist anymore.
>> [music]
>> I'm Neil Patel. I run one of the largest
independent marketing agencies in the
world. And I'm going to show you five
trends that are completely changing how
people decide what to buy online
>> [music]
>> and what you need to know about each
one. Let's dive in. Chapter one.
The way people search for products has
fundamentally changed. And most brands
are still invisible in the moments that
matter the most. People just don't type
in black leather jacket anymore. They
just point their camera at what they
see. Google Lens now processes 20
billion visual searches a month with 4
billion related to shopping. That's not
experimental. That's mainstream behavior
happening right now. And here's what's
actually happening. Someone sees a
product they like in a TikTok video or
Instagram or even real life. Instead of
trying to describe it with words, they
just open up their camera, point at it,
and Google Lens identifies it instantly
[music] complete with pricing,
availability, and where to buy.
According to recent data, only 10% of US
adults use visual search regularly right
now. But 42% say they're interested in
trying it. And among Gen Z and younger
millennials, your future customer base,
22% are already using it to discover and
buy products. Here's the problem for
brands. If your product imagery isn't
optimized for visual search, if your
metadata isn't accurate, if you're not
structured for image-based discovery,
you're invisible to these shoppers.
Amazon has seen a 70% year-over-year
increase in visual searches. Google just
introduced shopping ads directly into
Google Lens results. This isn't coming.
It's here. If you sell physical
products, you need high-quality images
from multiple angles. You need accurate
product data that visual AI can read.
And you need to understand that showing
your product is more powerful than
describing it. A study by MDG
advertising revealed that 67% of online
shoppers believe that high-quality
product images are more important than
product descriptions or customer
reviews. Chapter two. Trend two. Live
shopping compresses the decision
timeline. The gap between I'm interested
and I just bought it is collapsing
[music]
and is happening in real time. Live
shopping turns curiosity into instant
action. In 2022, Facebook was a leading
platform for live commerce with 57.8% of
global internet users making purchases
[music] during live shopping events.
Instagram was second at 45.8% followed
by TikTok at 15.8%. [music] Live
streaming shopping market was valued at
38.87
billion dollars in 2022. [music]
By 2032, it's projected to hit 256.56
billion dollars. And here's why this
matters. Live shopping removes
hesitation. Instead of seeing a product,
thinking about it, researching it, and
maybe buying it later, people watch a
live demo, ask questions in real time,
and buy immediately. Traditional
e-commerce has [music] friction. You see
something, you leave the platform, you
research, you compare, you get
distracted, you abandon cart. Live
shopping eliminates all of that. The
product is demonstrated. Social proof is
visible in the comments. Questions get
answered instantly. And the purchases
happen without leaving the stream. If
you're not experimenting with live
shopping, whether on TikTok, Instagram,
or your own platform, you're missing the
shift from delayed purchase to instant
conversion. The brands winning here
aren't just selling products. [music]
They're creating events. They're
building urgency. They're converting
browsers into buyers before doubt has
time to [music] set in. Chapter three.
Trend number three. AI is becoming the
first research destination. Your
customers aren't starting their product
research on a traditional Google search
result page anymore. They're asking AI.
Whether through Google's AI mode or
ChatGPT or even AI overviews. And if
you're not visible there, you don't
exist. If AI doesn't know you exist,
your customers won't either. ChatGPT
launched shopping research in November
2025. Within weeks, it became a go-to
tool for product discovery. The system
doesn't just answer questions. It
researches products across the web,
synthesizes reviews, compares specs, and
presents personalized buyers guide.
According to Yelp's post 2025's AI
shopper behavior report, 66% of shoppers
who purchase more than once a week are
using AI assistants like ChatGPT to
guide their purchasing decisions. And
34% are using it specifically for
initial product discovery. Amazon has
Rufus. Google is testing AI shopping
features. Perplexity offers shopping
through its pro tier. This isn't one
platform. It's the entire ecosystem
shifting towards AI-mediated discovery.
Here's what changes. AI doesn't rank
websites. It recommends products. It
pulls from reviews, specifications,
availability, and pricing across the
web. If your product data isn't
structured, if your reviews aren't
authentic, if your information is
incomplete, AI won't recommend you. Now,
what's really interesting about all of
this is that ChatGPT shopping research
doesn't include Amazon. That's a massive
blind spot. But it also means smaller
brands have an opportunity to get
recommended without competing directly
against Amazon's catalog. This matters
because AI is becoming the new
distribution channel. And that means a
few things have to change. First, your
product information has to be easier for
AI to understand. Second, you need real
customer reviews that AI can actually
pull from. Third, [music] your specs
have to be clear and accurate. And
finally, your pricing and availability
needs to be easy to find and up-to-date.
Because when someone asks ChatGPT,
"What's the best project management tool
for small businesses?" your brand either
shows up in that answer or it doesn't
exist in their consideration set. Now,
if you need help with all of this, you
can check out my ad agency NP Digital,
where we help companies with setting up
their website and data so that way AI
can easily crawl and understand
everything and more importantly,
showcase it to users who are potentially
interested in your product. Chapter
four. Trend four. Comparison shopping is
now the default.
Brand loyalty isn't dead, but it's
conditional. And that condition is
simple. Are you better than the
alternative? People don't ask, "Is this
good?" They ask, [music] "Is this
better?" According to SAP Emarsys, 60%
of consumers switched from a brand that
they were loyal to in 2025 because of
cost. [music] But price isn't the only
factor. 54% say lower product quality
weakens their loyalty. 49% [music] cite
price increases. And 47% point to poor
customer service. Meanwhile, McKinsey
found loyal customers tend to buy more
often and show higher willingness to pay
for brands that deliver real value.
Loyalty still matters, but only when
it's earned. But here's what's
different. Comparison shopping used to
require effort. You had to open multiple
tabs, read different reviews, compare
[music] specs manually. Now, AI does it
for you. ChatGPT compares products
side-by-side. Visual search [music]
shows you alternatives instantly. Social
commerce lets you see what everyone else
is buying. This means your product page
can't just describe your product
anymore. It needs to answer comparison
questions before it's even asked. Why
are you better than the alternative?
What [music] makes you worth the price?
What do your reviews say that
competitors don't? [music] Because 73%
of consumers will adjust their spending
to maximize loyalty program benefits.
And 90% of loyalty program owners see
positive returns averaging 4.8 times
their investment. But that only works if
your baseline product and experience are
competitive. Stop thinking about your
product in isolation. Start thinking
about it in context of every alternative
your customers are evaluating. Because
[music] that's exactly how they're
shopping. Make comparison easy.
Highlight differentiators clearly. Use
reviews strategically. [music]
And understand that loyalty is now a
value exchange, not a given. Chapter
five. Trend number five. Search happens
everywhere, not just on Google.
The search bar evolved. Discovery is
happening across every platform your
customers use. And most brands are only
showing up on one. According to our
data, Instagram processes 6.5 billion
searches per month. YouTube handles over
3 billion. TikTok is becoming a new
product search engine for Gen Z. ChatGPT
is emerging as a trusted discovery tool.
According to Hostinger's 2025 social
commerce survey, 82% of consumers use
social media to discover and research
products. In the same study, YouTube
leads product research at 52%. Followed
by Facebook at 45%, Instagram at 38%,
and TikTok at 34%. Hostinger's data also
shows that TikTok and Instagram dominate
Gen Z's product discovery. With [music]
55% of Gen Z favoring TikTok and
Facebook remaining the more popular with
millennials rather than Gen Z. Other
2025 Gen Z reports back this up, finding
that TikTok is a top product discovery
platform for Gen Z at around 77% with
Instagram close behind at around [music]
74% and YouTube used to be roughly 41%
for deeper product research. These
platforms are no longer just discovery
channels. They are purchase
destinations. Sprout Social reports that
39% of consumers make purchases on
Facebook, 36% on TikTok, and 29% on
Instagram when they are ready to buy.
This is what I call search everywhere
optimization. Your content needs to rank
not just on Google, but across every
discovery surface your customers
actually use. That means weaving
keywords naturally into video scripts,
captions, on-screen text, and
descriptions. Building topic clusters so
platforms map you as authority.
Optimizing for conversational search,
full questions, not just keywords,
because platforms now read everything.
Your audio, your captions, your
transcripts, your visual text, they're
matching all of it to user intent. If
you're only optimized for Google, you're
missing where your customers are
actually searching. You need to show up
on Instagram where they're browsing, on
YouTube where they're researching, on
TikTok where they're discovering, on
ChatGPT when they're comparing, and yes,
[music] still on Google when they're
verifying, because buying doesn't happen
in funnels anymore. It happens across
ecosystems, and the brands that win are
the ones showing up everywhere it
matters.
Chapter six. Trend loyalty is real and
fleeting.
There's a new type of customer loyalty,
and it evaporates the second something
stops trending. Viral products create
instant loyalty. They also create
instant churn. According to SAP, 14% of
consumers are now classified as trend
loyal. They buy what's popular in the
moment, driven by TikTok reviews, viral
drops, social proof. But here's the
catch. 29% of consumers lose interest
the second a product stops trending, and
15% admit they buy products purely
because they're going viral, not because
they need them. This creates a paradox.
Social commerce drove $571 billion in
sales in 2023, projected to exceed $1
trillion by 2028. Millennials are
expected to account for 33% of social
commerce spending, Gen Z accounts for
29%. But loyalty among these buyers
isn't deep. It's fast, emotional, and
tied to cultural moments. True loyalty,
the kind where customers stick with you
through algorithm changes and price
increases, has actually declined. In
2024, it dropped 5%, and now it's at 29%
in 2025. Meanwhile, 53% of consumers are
silent loyalists. They buy consistently
but don't engage. And 48% exhibit
incentivized loyalty, meaning they're
only loyal because of discounts and
rewards. So, the question isn't how do
you get customers? It's how do we turn
fleeting attention into lasting
relationships. You can't ignore trends.
Viral moments drive discovery, but you
also can't build a business on hype
alone. The brands that win do both. They
ride the trend to get discovered, then
they use personalized engagement,
loyalty programs, and genuine value to
convert trend-driven buyers into repeat
customers, because 88% of customers who
trust a brand will return as repeat
buyers, and increasing retention by just
5% increases profits by 25% to 95%.
That's the real opportunity, not just
chasing every trend, but turning trend
attention into trust. The truth is, the
way people discover, research, and buy
products has fundamentally changed.
Visual search, live shopping, AI
research comparison tools, and
fragmented platforms. These aren't
trends, they're the new normal. The
brands who win aren't just the ones with
best funnels, they're the ones who show
up everywhere their customers are
actually searching, and turn attention
into loyalty. If you want to understand
how AI and social platforms are
reshaping search and discovery, watch
this video next.